Hello. My name is Emma, and in today's video I am going to teach you about the present perfect and how we use it for when we talk about past experiences. Now, I know a lot of you probably have learned a little bit about the present perfect before, and maybe you thought it was really boring or really difficult, but I promise you today's lesson is going to be very interesting, because we are going to play a game-okay?-a game that will help you learn the present perfect. So let's get started. So the game is called Two Truths and a Lie. So just to remember, a truth is something that is true and happened-okay?-so something that is true and happened. A lie is something that did not happen. So how do we play this game? Well, I am going to tell you two things that are true about me and one thing that is a lie, and your job is you need to guess what is the truth and what is the lie. And we are going to do this by using the grammar, the present perfect-okay?-so let's get started. I'm going to tell you my first sentence, and I want you to think about it and guess is it true or is it a lie. I have walked 800 kilometers across Spain. That's a lot of walking. Let's look at my second-my second statement. I have lived in China. All right, and what about the third? I have seen a ghost. So these three sentences, two of them are true and one of them is not true. One of them is a lie. But before we figure out which is true and which is a lie, I want to ask you a couple questions about the present perfect. So these sentences are all in the present perfect. When we're using the present perfect to talk about experience, are these talking about the past? Are they talking about right now, the present? Or are they talking about the future? So these sentences or the present perfect, when we're talking about experience, it's used to talk about something that happened in the past. And this is really confusing for students because they see the word present, so they think that it always is talking about right now. But when we're talking about the present perfect, we're actually talking about something that happened in the past. Confusing, I know, but the main thing to know is that when you're talking about experiences in the past, you can use the present perfect. Okay, and I will go over how to use the present perfect in a moment, how it looks like and all that information. But for now, just to understand the idea of the present perfect is what I want. So we use the present perfect when we're talking about a past experience. Now, do we need to know when that past experience happened? Do we need a specific date, like July 21st, 1987, or yesterday, or last year? Or is the date not really important? We don't really have a date, we don't know when it happened, it was sometime before. So when we use the present perfect, we do not have a specific date. No date, okay? So I have these three sentences. You know they happened in the past, you know they happened before, but you don't know when. And the when part isn't really so important. What's important is I want to tell you about a past experience. So you notice there's no dates here, it doesn't say yesterday, last week, it doesn't have any of that time information, okay? So we have... It's talking about the past, there's no specific date. Together, if we want to put these together, we can use the present perfect tense. So now what we're going to do... I know you're really excited to find out what's true and what's false, but before we do that, I'm going to tell you about the structure of the present perfect, how we make it, and then we will have the big reveal where you will find out which is true and which is false. Okay, so how do we make a present perfect sentence when we're talking about experience? Experiences of the past specifically? Well, let's look, okay? So the first thing you need is your subject. A subject are words like I, you, he, she, it, they. It can also be, you know, a person's name, for example. My sister Audra, my dog Jackson, okay? So these are all subjects. So after you have your subject picked, in this case I have three subjects, I, I, and I, they're all the same subject, they're about me, the next thing you need to make a present perfect sentence is the word have or has. We call this the helping verb because it helps the main verb. In this case, I have, so the subject needs to match with have or has. I have, you have, he or she or it has, so to match and it is not have, it's has, and they have. Okay, so again, you have your subject, you have the words have or has, or if you want it to be a negative sentence about something you didn't do, you can use have not or has not. Okay, those are possible. And after you have these two parts, the third part is called the past participle, okay? That's a really scary sounding word, I think. It sounds really grammar-y and very confusing, but it's not. The past participle is a verb in a specific form. There are two types of forms of the past participle. You can have regular past participle words, so for example, play, the past participle of the word play is played, where you add an ED. Another example of a regular past participle is you have the word travel. Now, if you want the past participle of the word travel, again, you add ED. We call this regular because it has a specific rule. You add ED to make it the past participle form. If we look over here in my three sentences, I have walked. This is an example of a regular past participle. The verb is the word walk, and I've added ED to make it a past participle. My second sentence is also an example of this. I have lived. So, I've taken the verb live, and I've just added ED to make it lived. So, that's... Those are both examples of regular past participles. Now, English can be a confusing language, and that's because we have so many exceptions to the rules. For past participles, we call these exceptions irregular because they're not the norm. So, some examples of irregular past participles are words like eaten. So, this is the past participle of eat. So, in the present we say eat, in the past we say ate, and with the past participle we say eaten. Okay? Or, same with the word make, make. We say make in the present, made in the past, and the past participle of make is made. It's the same with the word see. The past participle of see is seen. Or do, the past participle is done. Or drink. I drink water, I drank water, I have drunk water. So, drunk is the past participle. So, how do you learn the past participles? If they're not irregular... Or, sorry, if they are not regular, then a lot of the times you just have to memorize them. Okay? And you'll start noticing some patterns, but the best advice I can give you is think about the words you use a lot and start there. So, if you like to talk about food and experiences with food, memorizing the word eaten is probably a good idea for you. Okay? So, start with the words you use a lot. Okay, so if we look at my example up here, we have an example of an irregular past participle. I have seen a ghost. All right, so this is how you create the form of a present perfect sentence. So, you have the subject, you have have or has, and you have the verb. And then you have the rest of the information, but the main thing we're focusing on is this part. Okay, so we've talked a lot about the present perfect. We've talked about when we use it to talk about past experiences. There are other times we use it, but in this lesson we're only focusing on talking about past experiences. We've talked about the form of the present perfect, and now we are going to do the big reveal. We're going to find out what is true and what is false. Okay? What are my two truths and what is my lie? I have walked 800 kilometres across Spain. What do you think? This is true. I can say I have walked 800 kilometres across Spain. Very crazy, I know. It took 33 days, a very long time. Another thing I can do is I can, instead of saying I have walked, I can change this to I've walked. It means the exact same thing. The only difference is this is... We can shorten have to I've instead of I have, so you have a choice. But this is true. What about number two? I have lived in China, or I've lived in China. Is this true or false? Is this the truth or a lie? This is true. I spent one year living in China. True. So, what is my lie, then? I have seen a ghost. So no, I have not. I have not seen a ghost, but my brother, my older brother, when he was 25 years old, he saw a ghost. So my brother has seen a ghost, or at least he believes he has. So there you have it. You found out what's true, what's lie, and you've learned about the present perfect. So, like I said, the present perfect can be fun, and it's something I really want you to practice because we use it all the time in English. And a lot of you have interesting stories or interesting lives, so here is your homework. In the comments section, what I want you to do is I want you to write three sentences. I want you to write two sentences that are true about yourself using the present perfect. Okay? So, two sentences about a past experience that is true. And then I want you to write one sentence about a past experience that is not true. It's a lie. Okay? And I want you to interact with each other. You can guess what sentences of people are true and which ones are not true. But the main thing is when you do this in the comments, it's very important you're talking about a past experience and you're using the present perfect. Okay? So, thank you so much for watching. I hope you have enjoyed today's lesson. I invite you to check out our quiz at www.engvid.com. There you can actually practice everything we've learned. Even before you write in the comments, maybe you want to practice the form of the present perfect. Our quiz is a great way to do that. I also would like to invite you to subscribe to my channel. There you will find a whole bunch of different resources on English across all different topics including vocabulary, writing, reading, studying, and many more. So, thank you for watching, and until next time, take care.
