Hello, people! In the past, but it's not over yet. It started at some point in the past and it's not over yet. So, I mean, it's something you've been doing from the past and you keep doing it to this day and probably will keep doing it in the future. The important thing is to always remember this detail. And how do you conjugate the present perfect? First, the verb ter in the present. The famous verb to have. I have, you have, he has. Don't forget my third person. She has, it has, we have, you have, they have. And then when you conjugate the verb in question that you want to put in the present perfect, you have to remember that most of the list of verbs, who has seen a list of regular verbs knows that it has three columns. The first column is the infinitive verb. The second column is the verb in the past. The regular verb in the past. And the third column, the participle. This third column is what you will use here. For example, I have gone. I have gone. I have gone to the beach every week. I have gone to the beach every week. And I will probably keep going. You have done. You have done. He has been. He has been. She has spoken. She has spoken. He has shown. He, she, that is not a human being, a book, something, has shown. And it is important to remember that only the verb to have in the present is that it will be conjugated in the third person. The rest, no. They will all have the same conjugation. For example, if I wanted to take the verb to go and conjugate it in all subjects, in all people, it will be I have gone. You have gone. He has gone. She has gone. It has gone. We have gone. You have gone. They have gone. Always in the same conjugation. And this applies to all of them. And when a verb is not irregular, that is, it is not on that list of irregular verbs, what do you do? You just conjugate it in the regular past, just like the class you saw a little while ago. Just take a look. You are seeing here on the screen the number of the class. You will know how to conjugate the regular verbs in the past. So, for example, look. The verb to work adds the ID. The verb to study, take the Y and put the ID. The verb to live, as it ends with E, you only add the letter D, following all those rules that you have already seen. So, look, if I want to say I have worked, I have worked. Você tem estudado. You have studied. Ele tem morado. He has lived. And so on. So, it is not a mystery. The most important things in the Present Perfect are remembering that it is an action that started in the past and continues to happen to this day and probably will continue to happen And remember that the verb to have conjugated in the present plus the participle form, plus the form of the past for regular verbs or if it is not an irregular verb, just conjugate it in the simple past. And then you have the conjugation. Ok, people? I hope you enjoyed it, taken all the doubts on this subject. Decorating regular verbs, there is no way, there is no rule, just taking the list and decorating regular verbs, because that's why they are called irregular, for this reason, ok? Because there is no trick, just decorating. Ok, people? Don't forget to like our official fan page, Professor Kenny, official on Facebook or on Instagram, prof.kenny. Alright? Thank you, people! Bye, bye!
