Hey, everyone! Today we are going to learn about the present perfect tense. We'll cover how to form it, how to ask and answer questions, and when to use the present perfect tense. Are you ready to get perfect? Let's do it! Let's start with the form of present perfect. You just need a subject, the verb have or has, and the past participle. That's the third form of verbs. Here are a few examples. I have eaten breakfast every day this week. She has visited Paris. They have had spicy food many times. For regular verbs, the past participle is the same as the past simple form. You just have to add "-ed to the base verb. For example, they have worked hard this month. We have watched that play already. I have studied every day this semester. Great! Do I use this rule for irregular verbs, too? Actually, no. Irregular verbs don't have one rule. They change in different ways. You'll need to memorize the past participle forms of irregular verbs just like you did for the past simple tense. Check out our past simple lesson if you haven't already. I have been to many countries with my family. I have eaten at JJ's diner for 20 years. I have done all of my chores today. Now that we understand how to form present perfect, let's take a look at when to use it. The easiest way to use present perfect is to think about time frames. This means the action happened in a time frame that started but is not finished yet. Here's an easy example. I have traveled to 20 countries. The time frame in this example is my life. I was born and I am still alive, so my life is not finished. We often use present perfect for life experience for this reason. Can you name some other time frames that started but are not finished? Today, this week, this month, this year. We can use present perfect for all of these. But if the time frame is finished, we can't use present perfect. Use past simple for finished times like yesterday, last month, and last year. Here are a few more examples. I flew twice last week. They have played 18 holes of golf today. He has read 3 books this month. He has never eaten sushi before. I noticed the word never in the last example. When do we use ever or never? Good question. We use ever and never only to talk about the time frame of life experiences, not for shorter time frames. Use ever to ask if something has happened at least once, and use never if the action has not happened at least once. For example, Have you ever gone to a theme park? Yes, I have been to Panda Land. It was magical. Have you ever written a book? Yes, I have written 3 books of short stories for my kids. They love them. Have you ever climbed a mountain? I have never climbed a mountain, but I'd love to. Now let's talk about how to make negative sentences using present perfect. Just add not after have or has. You can also use contractions. Have not becomes haven't and has not becomes hasn't. For example, I haven't visited Japan. He hasn't played basketball this year. She hasn't done her homework. What about asking questions using present perfect? Start the sentence with have or has, then add the subject and past participle. That's it! For example, Have you read this book? Yes, I have. Have you cooked dinner? No, I haven't. Another way to use present perfect is with these three words. Just, already, and yet. The word just means something happened very recently. For example, I have just finished my house chores. We use already if something happened earlier than expected or to emphasize that it happened. I'm going to feed the cat. You don't need to. I have already fed him. Let's go see the new comedy movie. No, I've already seen it. The word yet is used in questions and negatives and means something hasn't happened up to now, but we expect it to happen in the future. Have you gone to the supermarket yet? I need those ingredients to make lunch. Let's do a quick review. The present perfect is formed with subject plus have or has and the past participle, and you can use it to talk about life experiences, actions in unfinished time frames. Now it's your turn. Have you ever learned a new grammar tense and loved it? Write your answer in the comments below. We hope this video helped you understand the present perfect. Keep practicing, and soon you'll be a grammar master. Bye!
